Processing model (#79)
ietf-wg-jsonpath/draft-ietf-jsonpath-base: draft-ietf-jsonpath-base.md

The terminology of {{-json}} applies.

For the purposes of this specification, a JSON value as defined by

> {{-json}} is also viewed as a tree of nodes.

Reviewer: This is good.  We don't need to claim that JSON itself is a tree of nodes, only that this spec views them as such when convenient.

Maybe instead of "is also viewed..." we use "can also be viewed..."

Author: Well, we very actively view it as a tree of nodes in the current text, so I think we are good as is.

Reviewer 2: I like that "view" trick ...

Argument:
: Short name for the JSON data item a JSONPath expression is applied to.

Nodelist:

> : Output of applying a query to an argument: a list of nodes within

Author: There is a definition for "node" up in line 183.

I'm not entirely sure we need both "item" and "node", but I would ask for your patience to leave this for now until we figure it out.

> : Output of applying a query to an argument: a list of nodes within

Reviewer: I think "node" warrants its own entry if we're to define "nodelist."  What is a "nodelist" a list of?

> : Output of applying a query to an argument: a list of nodes within

Author: OK, I can make line 183 into its own entry.

> : Output of applying a query to an argument: a list of nodes within

Reviewer 2: Do we also need ...

```
Value:  A JSON value as defined in [RFC8259].
```

It would make your inline ...

```
(Note that the term JSON
   value also implies that this value complies to the definitions in
   [RFC8259], i.e., is indeed a JSON value.)
```
... obsolete.

> : Output of applying a query to an argument: a list of nodes within

Author: We already say:    The terminology of [RFC8259] applies.
So we have already imported all that terminology.

On the specific note:
A note is by definition redundant; it just alerts the reader to what is said in the note.  I think it is very much worth to say this again, because it reminds people that we are not taking a position on error handling with respect to broken JSON input -- this is just out of scope for the present specification.

Unicode code points as described
in {{RFC3629}}.

A string to be used as a JSONPath query needs to be *well-formed* and
*valid*.
A string is a well-formed JSONPath query if it conforms to the syntax
of JSONPath.
A well-formed JSONPath query is valid if it also fulfills all semantic
requirements posed by this document.

> Well-formedness and validity of JSONPath queries are independent of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The well-formedness and validity of JSONPath queries are independent of
```

the JSON value the query is applied to; no further errors can be
raised during application of the query to a JSON value.

(Obviously, an implementation can still fail when executing a JSONPath
query, e.g., because of resource depletion, but this is not modeled in
the present specification.)

> Discussion: are we ready for the error model defined here, i.e. one

> > that does not have runtime errors, but only compile time errors?

Reviewer: I think this needs further discussion before representing it in a PR.

Author: Indeed.  So we could resolve this question before merging, or we could merge with the question intact, to be resolved in later PR.

Reviewer: Are you saying that we should leave this markdown block quote in place to spur discussion?

Author: Yes.  Until that discussion is resolved.

Reviewer: If that's the convention we want to follow for authoring the spec, this is fine.

> ## Processing Model

Reviewer: We should add a paragraph that state that this processing model is an example for the purposes of explaining how JSON Path works and is not prescriptive of the internal workings of an implementation.  If an implementation wishes to (or needs to due to framework limitations) design a different process that yields the same results, this should be acceptable.

Author: Good point.  I put a new paragraph at the start of 3.2.  I had to weasel word a bit around "the same", because we are saying the model isn't deterministic.

Author: (Marking this as resolved -- it is however best if this is done by who raised the comment.)

Reviewer: I looked for it last night, but it seems I can't mark it as resolved.

A valid JSONPath query is executed against a JSON value, the *Argument*, and
produces a list of zero or more nodes of the JSON value which are
selected by the JSONPath.
(Note that the term JSON value also implies that this value complies
to the definitions in {{-json}}, i.e., is indeed a JSON value.)

The JSONPath query is a sequence of zero or more *selectors*, each of

> which is applied to the result of the previous selector and leaves
> input to the next selector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which is applied to each node in the result of the previous selector and outputs
a single list of nodes to be used as input by the next selector.
```

See [discussion](https://github.com/ietf-wg-jsonpath/draft-ietf-jsonpath-jsonpath/issues/14#issuecomment-694687029) over representing the algorithm as iterating over the individual results of the previous selector vs taking the full result set as a single input.

The suggestion above is in line with the rest of the content of the PR so far: each selector iterates over the output from the previous selector.

Author: The changed text implies that each function invocation of the selected leaves a node list that is then independently fed to the next selector.  I think the discussion resolved to doing the combine1 step first, yielding a single nodelist, and then applying the next selector again to each node in that nodelist.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I followed that.  My suggested changes align this statement with the rest of the your descriptions to say that each selector takes the nodelist (combined) output by the previous selector as a single argument and iterates over the nodes internally.

The other form is to say that the selector is fed each node individually by the processor, which doesn't line up with the rest of the PR.

Author: The processing model actually says that the selector processing the input nodelist into the output nodelist by processing each entry of the input nodelist into a partial output nodelist and then uses combine1 to put these together into the output nodelist.  This probably needs better terminology.  Your text tells me that a selector is applied to each element of the input nodelist and does not say what we do with all those partial output nodelists.

Reviewer: After rereading my comments, I see the confusion between what I've been saying and my addition of "each node in."  I think this can be removed from my suggestion:

```suggestion
which is applied to the result of the previous selector and outputs
a new nodelist to be used as input by the next selector.
```

Regarding how the results of each node are combined, this paragraph doesn't address it at all.  This paragraph instead focuses on the input/output stream of the selectors.  The "combining" logic is something internal to how the selectors work, which is discussed later when you're talking about the "combine1" function.  I think this is a good layout for the spec as it stands in this proposal.

Author: The word nodelist is first discussed in the next sentence, so this is simply pulling in an unneeded forward reference.

Reviewer: Still, "leaves input to..." is odd wording.

Author: 89d7d72: leaves ➔ provides

These results and inputs take the form of a *nodelist*, i.e., a
sequence of zero or more nodes.

The nodelist going into the first selector contains a single node,
holding the Argument.
The nodelist resulting from the last selector is presented as the
result of the query; depending on the specific API, it might be
presented as an array of the JSON values at the nodes, an array of
Output Paths referencing the nodes, or both — or some other

> representation as desired by the implementation.

Reviewer: I like leaving this open to the implementation.  We _could_ (in a later PR) go so far as to define what the output looks like for each of these cases in order to give an expected API for consumers of the implementations.

It may also be beneficial to explicitly state that a node list is just a collection of nodes; it is _not_ a JSON array, although its _representation in JSON_ is.  This is to say that a node list can be _serialized_ to a JSON array (e.g. for the purposes of output), but it is not one inherently.

Author: Right.  The current PR text says "depending on the specific API", so I think we are covered on the first item.  It also doesn't seem to suggest the nodelist is a JSON array, or are text changes actually required for the second suggestion?

Reviewer: I don't think that we should rely on implications.  Explicit statements are always better.

Author: Can you say what the wording should be?

Reviewer: Actually, it looks like lines 221-222 cover it: 

> While this list can be represented in JSON, e.g. as an array, the nodelist is an abstract concept unrelated to JSON data items.

Note that the API must be capable of presenting an empty nodelist as
the result of the query.

A selector performs its function on each of the nodes in its input
nodelist, during such a function execution, such a node is referred to
as "current node".  Each of these function executions produces a

> result nodelist, which are then combined by algorithm *combine1* into

Reviewer 3: combine1 appears to be undefined.

Author: Sure -- it has the strange name because it is a placeholder that needs to be filled in based on the discussion points.  But we can live with this placeholder while we resolve the discussions, hence giving it a name is a good idea for these discussions.

which is applied to the result of the previous selector and leaves
input to the next selector.
These results and inputs take the form of a *nodelist*, i.e., a
sequence of zero or more nodes.

The nodelist going into the first selector contains a single node,
holding the Argument.
The nodelist resulting from the last selector is presented as the
result of the query; depending on the specific API, it might be
presented as an array of the JSON values at the nodes, an array of
Output Paths referencing the nodes, or both — or some other
representation as desired by the implementation.
Note that the API must be capable of presenting an empty nodelist as
the result of the query.

A selector performs its function on each of the nodes in its input
nodelist, during such a function execution, such a node is referred to
as "current node".  Each of these function executions produces a
result nodelist, which are then combined by algorithm *combine1* into
the result of the selector.

> Discussion: We haven't decided yet whether there is only one
> *combine1* or a choice, with for instance simple concatenation and
> concatenation with duplicate removal, based on a definition of

> > duplicate, are candidates.

Reviewer 3: I think a single *combine1* is sufficient and much simpler than allowing selector-specific behaviour.

end of an array,
simply result in fewer nodes being selected.

But a selector doesn't just act on a single node: a selector acts on
each of the nodes in its input nodelist and selects an output
nodelist for each of them, as follows, which are then combined using
the combine1 algorithm to form the result nodelist of the selector.

> Discussion: Do we allow selectors that have their own combine1

> > variant, or can we always use the same?

Reviewer: Definitely worth discussion, but I think a common "combine" mechanism is simplest to understand.  Each selector defining its own forces the Path author to remember how each one behaves, which can get confusing fast.

Author: That is a good reason to stick with a common "combine1" model.

Reviewer 2: Each selector can only select nodes from the subtree of the current node. So with each selector the number of potentially selectable nodes is reduced or stays constant at best. It can never increase ... so "combine" suggests "increase", is misleading and should either be "pick model" or "select model" or something similar.

Author: Well, a selector operates on the nodes in the input node list.
The "combine1" function is about combining the outputs that each such operation provides.

So if you have `[1], [2]` as the nodelist (identifying nodes by their values here), and the selector is `.[0]`, the output nodelists from each selector function invocation are `1` and `2` respectively.  combine1 would create an output nodelist `1, 2`.  This is a bit boring, but more complex selectors can leave a nodelist for each node in the input nodelist, so we need to discuss how to combine them:

`{a: {a: 1}},  {a: {a: 2}}` as input nodelist, `..a` as selector: The individual nodelists are  `{a: 1}, 1` and `{a: 2}, 2`.  combine1 turns this into, say, `{a: 1}, 1, {a: 2}, 2`.

Reviewer 4: @goessner wrote:

> Oh well ... it's a simple "append" to the resulting nodelist. According to my mental model allowing only a single resulting nodelist, the sequence of ...
> 
> * `{a: 1}`
> * `1`
> * `{a: 2}`
> * `2`
> 
Just this. That corresponds to my "mental model", and directly in many implementations, some implementations.

> ... would be added, where order is implementation dependent of course (determinism).

Implementation dependent, yes, but I think the "natural order", would satisfy the minimally restrictive conditions identified by @glyn in #60.

Reviewer 3: Yes, to spell this out, there is _one_ object with more than one key/value pairs and thus one source of non-determinism in this example (assuming the visitation ordering of `..` will be tied down in the spec). So the other possible resultant nodelist would  correspond to:
* `{a: 2}`
* `2`
* `{a: 1}`
* `1`

Author: This thread proposes an answer to the discussion point.
Maybe we can merge the PR first and then specifically address the discussion point.

For each node in the list, the selector selects zero or more nodes,
each of which is a descendant of the node or the node itself.

> Discussion: Is that a common requirement?  Or can a selector also go

> > up, or to the query Argument?

Reviewer: This touches on the function of `@`, `$` within filter queries, and the idea of scope when `@` is used in nested filter queries.

I think it's better left for another PR when we've explored these ideas and how they relate.

Reviewer 2: A selector can never go up, given the information the current node is holding alone, as it lacks parent node info.

Maintaining parent node info during selection process introduces a new &ndash; hard to overview &ndash; level of complexity and should be avoided.

Reviewer 3: I agree a selector can never go up.
